changes to episode 4, tasks 1-16 (#141)
carpentries-incubator/high-dimensional-stats-r: _episodes_rmd/04-principal-component-analysis.Rmd

{: .challenge}

# Principal component analysis

PCA transforms a dataset of continuous variables into a new set of uncorrelated variables called "principal components". The first principal component derived explains the largest amount of the variability
in the underlying dataset. The second principal component derived explains the second largest amount of variability in the dataset and so on. Once the dataset has been transformed into principal components, we can extract a subset of the principal components in order of the variance they explain (starting with the first principal component that by definition explains the most variability, and then the second), giving new variables that explain a lot of the variability in the original dataset. Thus, PCA helps us to produce a lower dimensional dataset while keeping most of the information in the original dataset.

To see what these new principal components may look like, 
Figure 1 shows biodiversity index versus percentage area left

> fallow for 50 farms in southern England. Principal components are a collection of new, artificial data points for each individual observation called _scores_. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
fallow for 50 farms in southern England. Principal components are a collection of new, artificial data points, one for each individual observation called _scores_. 
```

To see what these new principal components may look like, 
Figure 1 shows biodiversity index versus percentage area left
fallow for 50 farms in southern England. Principal components are a collection of new, artificial data points called _scores_. 
The red line on the plot represents the line passing through the scores (points) of the first principal component.
The angle that the first principal component line passes through the data points at is set to the direction with the highest 
variability. The plotted first principal components can therefore be thought of reflecting the 
effect in the data that has the highest variability. The second principal component explains the next highest amount of variability 
in the data and is represented by the line perpendicular to the first (the green line). The second principal component can be thought of as
capturing the overall effect in the data that has the second-highest variability.

```{r fig1, echo=FALSE, fig.cap="Cap", fig.alt="Alt"}
# ![Figure 1: Biodiversity index and percentage area fallow PCA](D:/Statistical consultancy/Consultancy/Grant applications/UKRI teaching grant 2021/Working materials/Bio index vs percentage fallow.png)

> knitr::include_graphics(here("fig/bio_index_vs_percentage_fallow.png"))

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
knitr::include_graphics("../fig/bio_index_vs_percentage_fallow.png")
```

{: .challenge}

# Principal component analysis

```{r, eval=FALSE, echo=FALSE}
# A PCA is carried out by calculating a matrix of Pearson's correlations from
# the original dataset which shows how each of the variables in the dataset
# relate to each other.

> ```

Reviewer 2: Suggest removing this

Reviewer: Fine by me

Author: Removed in 6f3a5a4

PCA transforms a dataset of continuous variables into a new set of uncorrelated variables called "principal components". The first principal component derived explains the largest amount of the variability

> in the underlying dataset. The second principal component derived explains the second largest amount of variability in the dataset and so on. Once the dataset has been transformed to principal components, we can extract a subset of the principal components as new variables that sufficiently explain the variability in the dataset. Thus, PCA helps us to produce a lower dimensional dataset while keeping most of the information in the original dataset. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in the underlying dataset. The second principal component derived explains the second largest amount of variability in the dataset and so on. Once the dataset has been transformed into principal components, we can extract a subset of the principal components as new variables that sufficiently explain the variability in the dataset. Thus, PCA helps us to produce a lower dimensional dataset while keeping most of the information in the original dataset. 
```

Reviewer: 'We can extract a subset'.... Maybe we need to make it clear that it's not a subset chosen from any of the PCs but instead involves dropping the less important PCs?

Author: ```suggestion
in the underlying dataset. The second principal component derived explains the second largest amount of variability in the dataset and so on. Once the dataset has been transformed into principal components, we can extract a subset of the principal components that explain the most variability, giving new variables that explain a lot of the variability in the original dataset. Thus, PCA helps us to produce a lower dimensional dataset while keeping most of the information in the original dataset. 
```

Author: Is that a bit better or is it better to focus on dropping low variance PCs rather than retaining high ones?

Reviewer: I think it could be still clearer that we're keeping the first ones not a more random subset

Author: ```suggestion
in the underlying dataset. The second principal component derived explains the second largest amount of variability in the dataset and so on. Once the dataset has been transformed into principal components, we can extract a subset of the principal components in order of the variance they explain (starting with the first principal component that by definition explains the most variability, and then the second), giving new variables that explain a lot of the variability in the original dataset. Thus, PCA helps us to produce a lower dimensional dataset while keeping most of the information in the original dataset.
```

Reviewer: Great!

To see what these new principal components may look like, 
Figure 1 shows biodiversity index versus percentage area left
fallow for 50 farms in southern England. The red line represents the first

> principal component scores, which pass through the points with the greatest 

Reviewer: This needs to be clearer. It's not clear how the line represents scores or what scores are intuitively.

Author: See commits below!

> variability. The points along this line give the first principal component.

Reviewer: 'give the first principal component' what do you mean by this specifically? The value of the first principal component for each sample? Need more intuitive detail when targeted at non-statisticians.

Author: Have had a go at clarifying in e164deb

Is the description still accurate?

Author: b59028a

The second principal component explains the next highest amount of variability 

> in the data and are represented by the line perpendicular to the first (green line).

Reviewer: 'are' or 'is'? I'm honestly not sure if a single component should be plural.

> in the data and are represented by the line perpendicular to the first (green line).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in the data and is represented by the line perpendicular to the first (green line).
```

'are' or 'is'? I'm honestly not sure if a single component should be plural.

```{r fig1, echo=FALSE, fig.cap="Cap", fig.alt="Alt"}
# ![Figure 1: Biodiversity index and percentage area fallow PCA](D:/Statistical consultancy/Consultancy/Grant applications/UKRI teaching grant 2021/Working materials/Bio index vs percentage fallow.png)
knitr::include_graphics(here("fig/bio_index_vs_percentage_fallow.png"))
```

> The animation below illustrates how principal components are calculated iteratively from

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The animation below illustrates how principal components are calculated from
```
I don't think this is needed.

This is explained in more detail on [this Q&A website](https://stats.stackexchange.com/questions/2691/making-sense-of-principal-component-analysis-eigenvectors-eigenvalues).

```{r pendulum, echo=FALSE, fig.cap="Cap", fig.alt="Alt"}

> knitr::include_graphics(here("fig/pendulum.gif"))

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
knitr::include_graphics("../fig/pendulum.gif")
```

This is explained in more detail on [this Q&A website](https://stats.stackexchange.com/questions/2691/making-sense-of-principal-component-analysis-eigenvectors-eigenvalues).

```{r pendulum, echo=FALSE, fig.cap="Cap", fig.alt="Alt"}
knitr::include_graphics(here("fig/pendulum.gif"))
```

> ## Mathematical description of PCA 
> Mathematically, each principal component is a linear combination 
> of the variables in the dataset. That is, the first principal
> component values or _scores_, $Z_1$, are a linear combination 
> of variables in the dataset, $X_1...X_p$, given by
> $$ Z_1 = a_{11}X_1 + a_{21}X_2 +....+a_{p1}X_p, $$
> where $a_{11}...a_{p1}$ represent principal component _loadings_. 
{: .callout} 

> In summary, the principal components values are called _scores_. The loadings can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In summary, the principal components' values are called _scores_. The loadings can
```

head(pros2)
```

## Do we need to scale the data?

> PCA derives principal components based on the variance they explain in the data. Therefore, we may need to apply some pre-processing to scale variables in our dataset if we want to ensure that each variable is considered equally by the PCA. Scaling is essential if we want to avoid the PCA ignoring variables that may be important to our analysis just because they take low values and have low variance. We do not need to scale if we want variables with low variance to carry less weight in the PCA.

Reviewer: Very nice. This is much clearer than previous.
